I will say it -- I was nervous. I've been my own worst enemy all season long. I've had the power to get better results than I've gotten. Attacking myself into the ground at Grant's Tomb, Brumble, and Myles Standish; not following Ben Wolfe at Ninigret; missing the move at Quabbin; leading out the sprint at Harvard. Oof. That's a nasty list of missteps for a season that's only halfway complete.

With names like Myerson, Hyde, and Rhim on the start list, I knew we had to play it exactly perfectly to have a chance. A front row call up helped ensure that Johnny and I would stay in front of the Cat 3's getting jettisoned out the back almost immediately as the fatigue from their earlier race became apparent.

From the gun, I got on Connor's wheel and we apparently had a gap. I stayed with it because I thought the 3rd guy was Hyde, but apparently it was one of the Cannondale Lingo Jingo guys. TOO EARLY IN THE RACE TO NOT SEE STAIGHT! Connor did 90% of the pulling and I got a free ride up where the riding was smooth and I could stay off the brakes and pedal through the corners. Even after a chase group caught us, Connor kept smashing on the front.


When the field came back together, it was hard to gauge how everyone else was feeling, how I was feeling, and where my teammates were. There was a prime sprint, which I counter-attacked, got a small group going, but this Myerson guy was sitting on and screwing up the rotation, so we went back to the field. LAME!

I waited until the next prime lap and did it again. Brendan Rhim won the prime (again?) and was likely too gassed to follow me, which was a strategic advantage. This time I committed 100% as I could only attack so many times, and I just kept smashing across the top of the back stretch before looking back and taking stock of who was there. I knew there was already a gap as we came across for the prime, so I wasn't worried about towing the field around. I was happy to have Ben Frederick there, and Ian Clarke from NEXT-BMB immediately took a huge pull which was encouraging. I wasn't super happy to have Adam Myerson there, since he didn't play nicely in my previous breakaway attempt and I knew that if our group made it to the finish, the sprint would be very tricky. I was also worried about the absence of Stephen Hyde and anyone from BikeReg's 8-strong team.

So, there we were, 20 seconds in front of the field dangling with 35 laps to go. We never got into a smooth rotation. In most breaks I've been it, each person finds their favorite part of the course and takes their pull in the same place each lap. We were all over the place, pulling off in different directions and too close to the corners. At some point someone yelled that Johnny was riding across the gap. So, I took a couple of pulls off from the rotation, which was exactly what the doctor ordered. John never made it, but once I got back into the rotation, I was well-recovered and felt GREAT.

I was hoping the field would put a big chase on toward the end, which would have kept us more honest and put Myerson into more difficulty before the sprint. Unfortunately, the field gave up the chase with about 8 laps to go, which allowed everyone else to recover and get ready for the sprint. No one in the crowd lining the course tape before turn one was betting on anyone other than Adam Myerson in the sprint.

Soft-pedaling into the last lap, all four of us were fresh. Going into the bell with everyone gasping for air would have been better for me, I think. There was a slight uphill from the first turn through the second turn to the middle of the back stretch. The back section of the course was windy, also, and I knew an attack there was my only card to play. So, I was pumped and relieved when Ian started the hostilities, attacking out of Turn 2. I think I hit my peak power when I went after Ian. I knew I needed to create a gap to Ben and Adam there or else simply be a lead out man for those guys.

I came up on Ian before Turn 3, tucking in briefly into is draft before going around him, sprinting briefly on the slight downhill between 3 and 4. I thought I lost the race when I skipped a precious couple pedal strokes before turn 4, and when Myerson's tire appeared in my peripheral vision, I thought I'd lost the race. Yet, somehow, I kept smashing the pedals and the tire retreated back out of sight just as we crossed the line. I was immediately overcome by a wave of relief and euphoria. What an auspicious start to #critseason!

Instead of a post-race e-mail to those who participated, I thought I'd write a bit of a report here so that everyone can share in our #localglory.

Our pre-race was strong - we won the race before the race began with our preparation. We dressed properly and warmed up under the tent while our competition shivered and got soaked while doing laps in the parking lot. We got to the line ready to win while our competitors were focused on comfort and survival.

Early attacks against us were weak and fruitless. We smelled blood in the water and collectively decided to get aggressive.

To be honest, I thought Shinall's attack before they even put out the lap cards was a bit overly aggressive, but he got a gap immediately. It took a while for it to come back together, and I could already tell that people were suffering. AJ countered perfectly and got a good gap, too. I tried to bridge across, but I brought too many people with me. The field would need some more softening before we went for the jugular.

I talked to Gerry about attacking and we decided that he was going to go on the hill the next time. Someone attacked toward the end of the straight, which lined out the field. I made sure the pace was high on the climb, and then Gerry was fucking gone when he attacked across the top. GERRY, you put in a huge effort and got quite a gap for someone on their second race. Many Strava kudos to you, good sir. Looking around, no one wanted to work. Our competition was playing an awfully good game of poker or they were suffering mightily with the repeated attacks. At this point, I told AJ that the break was about to go and stick.

Gerry came back after two valiant laps and RICHARD, like the fucking hero he is, went on the next time up the hill. There was no reaction from the field. None. Zero. Later in that lap, someone tried to go across and blew up. On the next time up the climb, some other unnamed competitor put in a small dig that Mike and I covered. I looked back as we crested and the field was just letting us ride away.

I yelled "WE'VE GOT A GAP, HOLY SHIT RIDE BIKES!" like an over-exuberant Cat 4. Mike didn't hear me. Somehow. So, I sprinted across the gap to Richard. Mike tried to get his co-assailant to help him get across the gap, but he blew up. Mike made it across and we immediately had 15 seconds on the field with 10 or so laps left. Our gap held at 15 seconds for a couple of laps as we took smooth pulls. Then, as a result of Gerry and AJ fucking couches in the field, the chase stopped. Our time gaps went from 30+ seconds to over a minute on the last lap.

At some point AJ tried to come across but only made it halfway. When I looked back, it seemed like someone was coming across with AJ, so we didn't sit up and wait. Now that I think about it, the person behind AJ may have been Meredith who was a lap or two down. Oops!

Anyway, we motored on, the gap ballooned, and Mike annihilated Rich and me in the sprint because he's a wheelsucking whore. Then AJ got 5th and it was grand.

Ah, Myles Standish. A real New England Classic. In addition to the traditional winding course and the traditional lack of cell service was the traditional announcement that our race distance was something other than what was posted on BikeReg. Oh? 40 miles, not 50. Got it.

We were rolling deep with four Cat 1 and 2 riders and three or four more very water-logged Cat 3’s who just raced. We all had eyes on Adam Myerson, Keith Kelly, and Stephen Hyde. Hyde said that he would wear his CX national championship skinsuit if I split prize money with him, but I declined. Additionally, we knew that we had to be in every move. As the largest team in the race, we would be expected to chase if we missed out, and that’s never a good position to be in.

The race started out fast with a move going over the first roller on the course. Boom! Heiss was rocking his 76cm frame back and forth on his way to #dabreak. I covered a chase attempt and things chilled for a while, with Groupe Heiss gaining a little breathing room. Around the beginning of the second five-mile lap, Heiss’s move had been neutralized. The pace was hot and the field was stringing out.

This is the point in which everyone (Hi, @gerryantics, hi) should have alarm bells going off that another separation is going to happen. People are tired from the previous break, others are tired from chasing or bridging, and the Cat 3’s are wrecked from the previous race.

Smith and I moved up through the stretched out field as the group bounced across the rough pavement by the pond, and as we got to the hill, Keith Kelly lit it up and split the field right in half. Smith and I were there for GLV. Myerson, Hyde, Connor are there and all teams were represented. We hit it hard, with most everyone in the 15+ strong group taking strong pulls. After our gap to the rest of the field had stabilized, I realized Myerson was sitting on. As last year’s winner, I was most worried about him.

I can beat a tired Myerson in a sprint, but a fresh Myerson is a much more formidable competitor. So, I went to the back and hung out with Myerson. The rest of our group seemed mostly oblivious to our slacking and continued to flog themselves on the front. I recharged my batteries because it was clear that the size of the front group was not sustainable. On the third time up the hill, Hyde attacked with Tyler Clark (KMS) on his wheel. I brought Myerson across, and Keith, Connor, Matt Curbeau (CCB), and Kevin Goguen soon came, as well.

I was disappointed to not have Smith in the new front group, but I was relieved I hadn’t missed the fast kids’ party. This new group worked sort of well for most of the rest of the third lap, but Kevin and Myerson were taking turns sitting on which was screwing up the rotation. Sensing the need for heroism, Hyde took Kevin off the back of the group, and I mean REALLY took him off the back. It was glorious. Keith proceeded to get on the front and do 1.21 gigawatts, which meant that Hyde wasn’t getting back on. Sad!

Over the next five laps, our group worked well together. I knew GLV was shutting everything down in any groups behind us, so I wasn’t worried about getting caught. I took on the sprinter’s role and only worked as hard as Myerson was. From our previous coach/client relationship, I know that my threshold is substantially higher than his, but our sprints are similar. I needed to be fresher and somehow smarter than the cagiest old man on the local scene.

On the last roller before the finish, I was still agonizing about when to attack or open the sprint. An attack of the last roller before the descent worked well for me two years ago, and I was just about to try it again when the KMS kid beat me to it. I was immediately on his wheel and we had a gap on the other four. I knew that Myerson would try to catch a free ride on Connor's chase. He did.

We hit the wet downhill corner. My butt puckered. I grabbed the brakes. Shit. I’m toast. I turn on the afterburners and drop a spun-out KMS kid. I was never young enough to race on junior gears but it seems terrible. Okay, to the final rise. Still have a gap. Final flail out of the saddle into a full body cramp aaaaaaaaaannddd…..

Holy shit the finish line is way further than I though. Fuck fuck fuck. Here comes Myerson. I try to turn the legs over. Here comes the line. No blue in my peripheral vision yet. I don’t dare post up at the line because it’s going to be close. I come through right before Adam and Connor at 40+ mph. Wooh, relief and sweet victory.

I won't deny that it took a lot of watts to win this race, but I also think that reading the main competitors and the flow of the race was equally as important. One of my favorite things about bike racing is that there's almost always something to learn from every bike race, and for the new Cat 3's there is a LOT to learn. Hopefully, this was a good learning experience @KenG

After controlling the entirety of the Mt. Blue Crit the week before with 9 teammates, we were significantly less optimistic heading to Myles Standish with a smaller squad against a stronger field. The thought was that it would take a while, but the right breakaway would finally form, and we would have to be in it.

On the starting line, under sunny skies and maybe-a-touch-too-hot weather, the announcer informed us that our race was about to start, and by the way, the race is a full five-mile lap longer than BikeReg said because…. well…. okay, you’re off!

I suppose everyone else thought that the first few breakaways would fail because the pace was tranquilo at the start. Al Donahue (JAM Fund/NCC) towed the reluctant field for a little bit until Sam decided to roll off the front. How much did the field fear his long-range prospects, you ask? Not one bit. Sam was almost out of sight when Bobby Bailey (Dealer.com) dragged a group across.

After Sam’s move, a flurry of attacks went but were quickly brought back.

Each successive attack was met with a less and less enthusiastic chase. Heading into lap 3 of 8, the field was single file, meaning one rider’s inability to follow an acceleration would split the field.

“The break is going to go,” a wiseman named AJ Moran said to me.

I nodded and made my way to the front. When I got there, Brian Fuller (JAM Fund/NCC) had punched his one-way ticket to DA BREAK. Knowing that Brian won Purgatory last year and is the reigning Massachusetts Road Race Champion, I decided that this was a good party to join.

Bridging across to a steamrolling Brian Fuller was no easy feat, and the pace did not let up as we traded pulls. Every other move had been brought back thus far, so we were exceptionally motivated to make this one stick.

The first lap away was brutal. The pace was in no way sustainable for another five (five!?) more laps.

At the end of our second lap away from the field, I spotted a lone rider coming across the gap. I don’t know who it was; he never made it.

The pace eased slightly, as we silently hoped our chaser would come share the workload. We still had half the race to go, after all. It soon became clear that we weren’t getting help, so I drilled it up the one climb on the course. I went way too deep and found myself vulnerable. Luckily, we were too far from the finish for Brian to forge on alone. He took some longer pulls until I sorted myself out, and we kept a very smooth, steady rotation going.

As we saw two to go, we had no idea what the time gap to the field was. I asked Gerry for a time gap, but he just shrugged at me. Thanks, Gerry! In the absence of a time gap, we had to ride like we were about to be caught - hard.

Coming through with one 5.3 mile lap to go, someone yelled that the gap was 50 seconds. I didn’t know if that was from the previous lap (over 11 minutes old) or more recently on course, so we had no other choice but to keep smashing pedals.

The climb came about halfway through the lap, and Brian had a clear advantage there. After the climb was a flatter tailwind section where it would be hard to get away followed by a descent to the finish. If I could make it to the tailwind section, I liked my chances in the sprint.

Heading into the climb, I told Brian that we needed to take it steady since we weren’t sure of the time gap. To my surprise and pleasure, he complied. Heading into the last rise before the descent to the finish, Brian stopped taking pulls. His attack was imminent. Not wanting to lead out the sprint, I put in an all-or-nothing dig before the crest of the hill and maintained a small gap all the way down the hill and to the line.

Mere seconds after finishing, Sam came flashing through in third, followed by Myerson and Hyde (Astellas). AJ, Mike Shinall, and Smith did excellent work to set up the breakaway and position Sam for the sprint. Getting two guys on the podium in a strong field was a whole-team effort, for sure.
