Now that I have a bit of free time I can give you a quick rundown of the madness. It all began with this picture being tweeted to the team account. (@nu_cycling) Naturally we all said "yeah right bullshit" and carried on with our lives. A few days later, I received the email to my own address, to which I said "yeah right, bullshit" and carried on with my life. Then I got an email from some Harvard kids who were talking to the people. They were game to go. Eric (previously fallen from grace GLV member) took the info to the international student service office to look into it, and low and behold these people were not bluffing. They said that they would provide race bikes for us if we couldn't bring them, and since we were trying to minimize costs and weren't really taking the race seriously, we agreed.

Fast forward a few weeks, we have plane tickets (paid for) and visas. Next thing you know its Oct 30 and we're on our way to China! (We still have no clue what's going on, communication has been totally miserable.) After a long flight of endless food and free cocktails, we arrive in Shanghai. I am travelling with Kenny (currently riding for B2C2, young speed demon and mtb extraordinaire), Max Nagel (from NU) and Eric Panicucci (who doesn't even ride bikes anymore), 4 kids from Harvard and Zach Ulissi from MIT (and MetLife). After going through customs we walk through a huge line of limo/taxi drivers with signs on them, and the last ones say "Northeastern Cycling" (totally badass), and theres some Chinese kids with shit eating grins waving at us. We all say hello, pile into a shitty bus for the nearly 2 hour drive into the city.

Check into our hotel. It's baller.
They take us out to dinner. It's baller (and free for us)
We enter the nightlife in Shanghai. Its baller.

The next day a bus showed up at our hotel full of Germans, Austrians and an American cat 1 from Wisconsin. The Germans brought their own bikes, and they all look very swift. Soon we find out that WE HAVE TO RACE ON GIANT ESCAPE 2.0s (Google it) We all get sad because the Germans are going to hand us our asses, as we are racing on dad bikes (no offense Josh).

The 4 hour drive to Qiando Lake where the first race was took 7 hours, since we got lost in bumfuck China forever. Bumfuck China is way more bumfuck than say, bumfuck NY. Eventually, we check into our next hotel. (its baller, and free for us) We receive meal coupons for the next few days, and go to bed.

Next day, we get to drive the course. There are 2 turns, and its essentially a very subtle uphill the entire time through mandarin orange fields and misty (smoggy and gross) mountains. We then receive our steeds for the race. EVERY SINGLE BIKE IS A SMALL. Also, the brakes are switched. (Right=front, left=back) We realize carnage is imminent. Then its decided by the authorities that the Germans who brought their own bikes also have to race on the size small Giant 2.0s. LOL. Can you imagine? While wandering the lovely city of Qiando Lake we start catching sight of some FAST Chinese guys. Factory kits, legs like Hercules, Dogmas with Di2 etc. The Chinese students in our race haven't showed up yet to the hotel, so we all cry assuming that this is some sort of foreign shaming event where they pit us against Chinese elite racers on actual race bikes. Turns out there is also a non-collegiate race. Thank god. At this point the hotel is decked out with banners, huge posters with the RadioShack team on them, check in tables etc. All for the "TOUR OF ZHEJIANG INTERNATIONAL ELITE FAMOUS UNIVERSITIES"

We race our tiny seatposts past the max, flip/slam the stems, strip the reflectors, and swap the pedals.

Fast forward to race day.

The Chinese racers are smoking cigarettes before the start. This bodes well for us. We (Kenny, Max, Zach, Wisconsin and the Germans) realize quickly that there are about 30 competitive racers there, and decide to blow the race up immediately. After a massive opening ceremony with CCTV cameras, music, speeches in Chinese and explosions of streamers followed by the STAR WARS THEME SONG the race starts.

I have to go to class. Will continue later.

So, the race. They shoot off the gun, and the Wisconsin kid begins sprinting 100% full gas, pacing the motorcycle ref, who has no clue whats going on. I made the mistake of starting a few rows back, and had to dodge dozens of slow Chinese riders with the speed wobbles at 10 mph. After 10km of all full gas to remove ourselves from the fuckshow behind us, I'm seeing 4 of everything and kenny, being the awful teammate he is, keeps attacking the group. I am dying. My heart rate hasnt gone above 165 since the mayors cup, and its at 190something breathing nothing but SMOG. We enter a tunnel through the mountain, and its dark as hell. A german kid crosses wheels with zach at 40kph and dissapears into the chinese pavement, probably to be stolen by orange farmers and sold into slavery. Eventually there is a group of six. Kenny makes it into the move that would win, and I sit on the Germans wheel. Eventually Kenny is going backwards past our group, and I start to chase. The German wont, so I motion to the Chinese kid who hasnt done a shred of work all race (because I assume he is broken) to pull though. He does finally, and proceeds to drop me, hard. 5 up the road, and me. all alone in the smoggy countryside. I come through the feed zone and sputter "thank you" in chinese and "fuckwords" in english as I grab a bottle from a volunteer. Finished that race in 6th, Kenny 7th, max won the field sprint for 12.

HUGE closing ceremony. More music, more speeches, strange meats in plastic boxes for lunch. Northeastern wins the team competition. Payout is 12 deep, everything below 5th gets 500 rmb, we got 6000rmb for the team prize. Now, we are loaded in a country where a 22 oz beer costs about 30 cents.

Dinner: its the same chinese food as breakfast.

Next day we travel to Longyou. Smog increases by two. Check into our hotel. (Its baller, and free for us) Drive the course in a bus. 70km course, through bamboo forests, narrow roads, about a dozen small villages, rice paddies, the whole bit. Pretty wild overall.

Technical meeting commences that night. Two major points:
1) no clipless pedals allowed because its dangerous,
2)there is a section that we have to dismount and walk, because its dangerous. This section is 6km long.
Immediately there is an out roar from the Chinese attendees. Then, these points are translated to English, and there is an out roar from everyone else. Everyone is yelling, a chinese girl is going HAM on the chief official, total chaos. Tea is served.
Eventually, the pedal rule is removed, and the walking section is cut down to 1km. At this point, who cares? The race is so absurd that nothing matters anymore.

Next day: Chinese food for breakfast! We arrive to the start early. They havent totally set up yet, and are essentially just putting up barriers in the middle of traffic without redirecting. EVentually, the road is blocked and traffic behind us is screwed, but we're clear ahead. Again, a massive opening ceremony. We were then told that there would be FOUR THOUSAND police and military on course to keep it safe. 4,000. 4k. correct. (We had the full road for both races) I swear to get to the front line this time, then all of a sudden one line is uttered in chinese by the Minister of Propaganda for Longyou, and everyone is sprinting to the start! I literally pick my bike up and plow through 6 rows of racers, because god knows what the starting pistol will bring. I am starting in the front and no one will stop me. I make it. Hooray. Bang.

Were rocketing through town on commuter bikes, single file with the masses behind us, when suddenly, the pace car that was supposed to be in front of us the whole time comes from the right through a gap in the barriers and makes a left on course. Turns out we were supposed to follow it, and suddenly about 20 people behind us hit the ground at high speeds. (zach ulissi, yesterdays champion got caught up in the mess. by the way he won over 1000 dollars for winning.) We all dismount, run across the grass and jump back on course. Now we need to navigate a sea of chaos to make it back to the front. EVentually we do, and start the pain train again. Eventually its the same group of americans, germans and 2 chinese racers. After we have put the pack behind us safely, we ease up a bit. People in all the villages are going totally nuts, and we blow kisses and wave as we follow massive police caravans along course. Then we start going uphill, battle a bit, then reach the walking part. Its downhill through a bamboo forest with sporadic guardrails. Totally safe to ride, but whatever. We call a truce, take off our shoes and go for a walk.

At the bottom of the hill, we put our shoes back on next to some chickens and dogs (which we had to dodge all day) and its on again! Awesome twisty descending through tiny rural villages, whole road, Giant Escape 2.0s, its a blast. Some good punchy climbs, no one gets left behind though. We are now a group of 8, and everyone is working really hard. There are 3 Germans in our group, me, kenny, Wisconsin and the 2 chinese guys. Eventually, the 2 chinese guys explode and we carry on. I am pulling with 10k to go, and suddenly realize that I am about to depart the group in the wrong direction. I tell Kenny that he should quit doing work, because Im toast. Then Wisconsin yells (turn a bigger gear, Dom!) I try, fail, and fade away into the smog to lose the group.

Class again, will continue tonight.

Dinner: its the same chinese food as breakfast.

As the Germans see me cracking, they start barking at eachother and form a Jens-power-trifecta to smash my hopes of catching on. Shortly thereafter, I am all alone again, surprising shattered for such a strange race, and I HATE China. I HATE CHINA. I HATE CHINA. I turn out of the village to ride along the river, and its a mean headwind. Im basically spinning granny gears, praying the Chinese kids we dropped earlier dont catch up to me. Eventually I see them off in the distance, and put in another effort. No dice. They pass me, and I hop on their wheel for a few hundred meters, then I lose them. A few seconds later, we come upon a bridge that we need to go under. Totally normal right? NO. The bridge has a sign on it, indicating a clearance of 1.6 meters. Its a goddamn freeway overhead, and theres barely enough space for a car to go under it. There are a bunch of cigarette smoking cops?/army? dudes waving at me to tell me to walk again. I get off my bike and start to walk down into this ditch with baseball size rocks as gravel filling it. The Chinese guy ahead of me falls, his Giant Escape 2.0 falling on top of him and his silly flouro jacket. As lame as it sounds, I attack on foot! Suck it, China. I pass my fallen enemy (on foot) as he gets off the ground to continue (on foot). Is this what cyclocrossing is? I do an ill cross mount back on the road and ride on, sucking down the bottle of coke in my jersey. Now we are coming back into town, and the kid I SMOKED (on foot) whizzes by me (on a bike) like I'm standing still. Dont know where that came from as he couldnt even walk a few minutes ago. Im still broken, riding slowly though streets lined with cops, behind them packed with people who probably think Im Rance Armstrong. Eventually I come through the final roundabout (just like in Paris!) and cross the line in 8th. A race volunteer asks if I am okay, I say "water" and she hands me some small can. I guess it was some kind of knockoff redbull. Needless to say it was foul as hell. Soon we are being swarmed by photographers, posing for photos, signing autographs. I swear to god I must have posed for 60 pictures after both races. Some lady asked Eric to hold her baby while she took a picture. Kenny ended up in 3rd, losing 2nd by .2 seconds by a bike throw. Max won the field sprint again for 12th.

There is another huge closing ceremony. During these things, I dont even know when theyre saying my name so I have English speaking volunteers signal to me when to step up and wave to the adoring masses. They give us medals, (everyone snaps the lids off the boxes immediately, I bet they were MADE IN CHINA), a huge award plate for winning the team competition again, and red faux-leather booklets with "honorary credentials" stamped across them. Also massive envelopes of cash again. They give us strange packed lunches again, and we returned our beloved commuter bikes and walked back to the hotel.

Then they had us pile onto busses to go speak at local high schools about college in America. I got assigned to classroom 18. I enter, and all the kids go fucking nuts. I'm talking girls screaming, cheering, clapping, foot stomping, photographs, total madness.
"Hi, Im Dominic, I study civil engineering at Northeastern University in Boston, in America"
Repeat madness. I might as well be Justin Beibz in an American middle school. I am terribly confused. There is a Q/A session about school and what I like, and everyone goes nuts again every time I open my mouth. Then its their turn to impress me, as a girl comes up and does a dance, then a kid comes up and solves something that looked like a rubix cube on steroids, then we played musical chairs (which I lost, in the second round.) Then one girl comes up and asks me to write something in her little book. I say, "Sure." Next thing I know there are 25 Chinese highschoolers shoving notebooks in my face. Literally all i can see is notebooks. Every time I try to grab one, a different one gets forced into my hand. I write a sentence in each.

"Follow your dreams!" - Dominic
"See the world!" - Dominic
"Do what makes you happy!" - Dominic
"Dismantle your Communist government! Revolt!" - Dominic

After I am dragged from the clutches of these highschoolers and posing for 20 more pictures, I find out that everyone who did this had the same experience. Wild.

Now, its beer time. After getting together in the lobby for a few minutes to discuss plans, it turns into a rager in the lobby. Kids from all different countries drinking and singing in different languages, and passing around bottles of "medicine" or "white spirits" that I was warned to not drink before I even left America. Zach Ulissi made me do it. Blame MetLife. Then a cop storms over, and we all shut up. I think, "This is it. My life in a Communist jail cell begins tonight." After a brief translation, it turns out that he was heading up the massive cop operation for the race, and wanted some suggestions. Then he cracked open a beer and PARTY ON! Soon the doorman brings over 2 more cases of beer. Totally random. He then just walked back to his post at the door. One of the race directors then comes over with two cases of strange strawberry yogurt milk juice boxes. He chugged one when we yelled gan bay. It was hilarious. Then he asked us if we wanted to try some rabbit head, we say yes. He says "great I'll go tell the chef." Then he comes back with what is essentially a plastic shopping back stuffed with duck heads. Something got lost in translation. Tasty, pretty much no meat, and the spiciest thing I have ever eaten in my life.

The next day we traveled to Hangzhou, do touristy things like rent 6 person bicycles and chase pretty French girls around the lake. On a serious note, we hiked some really cool ancient paths, toured an amazing Taoist monastery in the hills and spend some time in some badass gardens after dark. Very cool city. Went out to a really nice dinner, there were 10 of us. Bill was about 40 US bucks total. Unbelievable. Nightlife there was next level shit. I was way out of my league in dress, dollars, lack of Aston Martins and Lambos, and pretty much everything. It was fun around and watch the insanity unfold though.

Back to Shanghai, checked into a 26th floor executive suite with a panorama view of the skyline for 25 dollars each, more dirt cheap nice dinners, sightseeing etc. Then we took the maglev train to the airport. The drive that took 1:45 on the way in took EIGHT MINUTES. 431 kph was the max speed.

Then we flew home. Girl from Harvard missed the flight back to America. Who let her into that school amirite?

They said theyre doing the race again next year, but over 6 days and a 50,000 RMB prize pot. Go back to college, because after the 2 hotels I had to pay for, the food I bought, the visas, I still came back richer than I left. Unreal experience.