I wrote these for Josh, he thought I should share with the team. It's a very long read, I take no offense if you don't read a single word of it. If I'm lucky you'll read some of it and decide to sign up next year despite the fact its a hilly stage race and not a crit. I am without a doubt a better rider after this experience. I made a lot of mistakes, had to make a lot of quick decisions, but gained a lot of experience and may have even done something to be proud of here or there.

Part 1 - Day 1: TT, 5.7 miles netting uphill

Finding parking for the TT took forever. When we finally did, we realized that you didn't sign it at the start, so my warm-up was completed over the 800 foot climb to Sugarbush to sign in. Once signed in, I got to the start with plenty of time. I hopped on the trainers they had set up for us and continued to spin out. There was a clock on the tree across from the trainers. When it was 9:35, I got off the trainer to head over for my 9:40 start time. Wouldn't you know it, the clock was 5+ minutes off so I missed my start by almost 2 minutes. After using strava and some backwards math, my time was 16:27, which put me around 40th out of 60+, but due to the late start I actually clocked in at 18:07 which put me third to last. Good news here is I executed the plan Josh and I established flawlessly going for 350 on the uphill then 300 on the downhill/flat and managed to set a new power record at 317 for 16+ minutes. I protested the result but they didn't have any of it, and I guess that is on me. I was in a dark place the rest of the day (Sam and Smith can attest.) I had no chance at the GC even with a great TT, but I looked like a fool and would have only been mid-pack even if there were no errors. I expected better. Emerson finished 13th, 43 seconds back on the leader, Brad Bradford.

Part 2 - Day 2: Circuit Race, 4 laps, 72 miles

Well, with all the pressure of the GC off my back, I knew I was going for the sprint. I would have 4 chances. Points went back 4 places, 6-4-3-2 for the intermediate sprints and 5 places, 10-7-5-3-1 for the finish. Chance number 1: I positioned myself perfectly, or so I thought. With 1k to go, I was 6th wheel. As the rider came off the front, I made a critical mistake of letting him slot back in front of me. Since there was still 1k to go I figured this was a good idea. We hit 500m and I'm sitting 5th wheel, pretty darn happy about it. With probably 300m to go, the lead guy opens up his sprint early, the rest follow and take up the entire lane, 4 wide. The intermediate sprints had a yellow line rule so I couldn't get through. I'm just sitting there in the draft absolutely useless. I finish 5th, but am super fresh from it as I never actually sprinted, so I attack as soon as we cross the line. Nothing comes from it sadly, so I slot back in. Note, I now had a bit more knowledge about the sprint. Chance number 2: I move myself back up to 5/6th wheel with 1k to go. I take a risk and put myself in the wind and move next to the lead rider. I match his tiring pace and he eventually falls back. I set a high tempo into the final sprint saving a bit for when someone makes a move around me. Someone comes up next to me with 200m to go and I open it up. I leave the rider next to me in the dust, but soon after one rider comes around me, and then another shows me a wheel and JUST nips me at the line. There was a rider up the road, so I took 4th and 2 points. Chance number 3: I make my move to the front before seeing the 1k to go, and put out tempo, knowing these guys won't stand for that. They come around me with 1k to go and I slot in 4th wheel. Lead guy goes at 200m, I wind up and blow them all out of the water. Sadly, a rider was up the road again so I took 2nd and 4 points. Chance number 4: This is the finishing sprint, I knew it would be more competetive. With 5k to go I realize that moving myself up is going to be very hard. I tried and tried and tried to go up the middle but there was never room. People kept on going up the sides and pushing people back through the middle so I found myself bleeding spots. Finally, with probably 1.5k to go, I go to the yellow line and just wait for my chance. As we cross 1k to go, I see an opening and go to the front. I go to barge my way into 3/4th wheel, but Emerson is sitting there, in the wind, blocking where I want to go. I took a few seconds to assess my options: I either barge through Emerson (which I HIGHLY considered, sorry bud), I could tell him to move up and let me slot in behind him (and make him my lead-out), or I could slot in front of him and lead him out. I give in and decide to lead him out. There were 1 or 2 people up the road that would not be caught, so I got on the front with 1k to go and put out a fast tempo, knowing an attack would come. At 500m it came, and I tried to smoothly open it up to keep Emerson on my wheel. This was a mistake, as the rider attacked real hard and I could never get in his tow. Everyone else was happy to let me sit 10 meters behind this dude, fine. At 200m I was seeing stars and opened up what was left of my sprint. I held it until 100m when everyone started to come around me. Emerson managed 9th, I came in at 13th. No time lost for Emerson, but he was out of the GC bonus and I was out of the sprint points. Good take away from this day is that I got to sprint 4 times in one race...something that I do less than once a race on average. I was able to learn and adapt as the race progressed and I had a lot of fun, but I went to bed this night frustrated that I did not get more points and that I gave up a lot of meaningful sprint points in the final sprint without being able to gain anything GC points for Emerson.

Part 3 - Day 3: Road Race, App Gap, 64 miles

I was sitting like 5th or 6th in sprint points with 6 points against the leaders 16 points. I had one goal this day, win the one and only sprint at mile 19. At mile 10, a guy went off the front, but he had no sprint points so I did not care. At mile 15 the games started to be played, and I found myself in a 5 person break with the Green Jersey and a couple other sprint contenders. One guy started attacking immediately, and we kept it under control to make sure we worked together until we had a good gap. We got a 30 second gap and then it got fun with about 2k to go. There were 2 attacks, nothing that broke up the group but it got the blood pumping. With 500m to go the cat and mouse started. I found myself 3rd wheel into 200m when the green jersey came around from the back. I hopped, got on his wheel, and then blew his doors off at 50m to go. There was still a rider up the road, so I picked up second place in the sprint with 4 sprint points to the green jersey's 3. 1 point gain, better than nothing. We had over a minute gap on the field, and as people started to look back, I told them no way we were just gonna float back to the field. We had a huge climb coming up and none of us wanted to do it with the field. I got us into a rotation and we chugged along pretty comfortably. We had a gap of over 2 minutes at the base of the climb. When it got steep, we caught and passed the guy who was off the front . A big dude in our group of 5, Ralph Pahlmeyer, was huffing and puffing and starts skipping pulls very early into the break. We let him skip some pulls on the uphills, but kept him on because he was a good wheel to follow when it flattened a bit. With 200m to go to the top, he takes off for the KOM and was able to pull it off pretty easily. Lost all respect for him, DO NOT GIVE THIS GUY AN INCH, EVER. This attack broke up the group for the KOM. As 3 of us rounded the top of the hill, one of the guys with 0 KOM points and not a chance in hell comes around me last second. I ended up over the hill in 5th place and picked up a meaningless KOM point. I took a peak back and saw the field with maybe 100m to go. We were less than 30 miles into a mountainous 64 mile road race. I take a second and think over the situation: due to my missed start in the TT I have no chance in the GC, and I already picked up the sprint points I set out to get. Most importantly, I am a terrible climber so hanging with the peloton through the climbs would absolute shred me. But most importantly, we had a HUGE technical descent coming up (something I do EXTREMELY well) and there was also a dirt road descent later on in the race (something I do even better). I think for maybe 2 seconds, shut my brain off, and absolutely empty the tanks until I spin out my 52/11 and sit on my top tube. Time for glory or utter failure. I pass everyone I was in the break with and rip this descent. Every time I see a flag person telling me to slow down I know I'm picking up loads of time of the peloton as they're gonna crawl through those spots. Throughout the rolling descent I do a lot of aero tuck, a lot of hard pedaling over the rollers to keep the momentum up, and followed it up with some more aero tucks. Eventually the road flattens out and I get into a good groove at a fast tempo. I knew I had about an hour and a half to go, so I shot for 250. 300 on the uphills, 200 on the descents. Anytime I found myself in my 52/11 I got in an aero tuck and got in some rest. The moto-ref gave me some gap updates and they were typically around a minute to a minute and a half. I pick up a KOM at mile 47/48, and as I look behind me at the top I see a couple KOM contenders in the distance. It was now the dirt road descent and I fly through it. When it ends, I know its the beginning of the end of the race with a long uphill 14 miles to the finish that held 2 KOM hot spots and just one point of relief between the two. I settle in at what I can. Around mile 55 I am a couple miles into the climb and it started to get steep. The moto ref tells me there are 2 riders 11 seconds back, and the field is 55 seconds. The two riders catch me, one of them in Polka Dots, and I hang as long as I can. I finally had to admit defeat and settled back in. The field catches me with less than 10k to go just before the second to last KOM. I join up with them, sit in, and enjoy the draft during the last short downhill section until the App gap. As soon as we hit the final 3 miles of uphill, I pull the chute. I have no chance of sticking with the group, I have nothing to gain, and recovering for the crit is the only thing on my mind. I go as absolutely slow as I can (which was soooooo hard) and managed to keep my average watts just over 200 for the app gap. Emerson pulled off 10th place and moved up to 9th in the GC, which was great. I felt super pro riding off the front, descending like a champ, and ripping through the feeds and towns with tons of applause. Not to mention all the face time for GLV and the kudos after the fact. And the best thing...since I took the entire race at my own pace, I felt fantastic at the end. If I stuck with the peloton, the climbs would have shredded me. My legs felt wayyyyy better than they should and I knew I was in good shape for the crit. I was second in sprint points after this stage, but still 9 points down off the lead. This was fun, despite the result. Riding without pressure is absolutely amazing.

Part 4 - Day 4: Burlington Crit

Finally, the day was upon us. Emerson was in 9th for the GC, I was second in Sprint. There were two intermediate sprints with 30 to go and 5 to go, which gave points 4 deep, 6-4-3-2, and the final sprint was 5 deep with 10-7-5-3-1. There were also different intermediate sprints that awarded GC time, but no sprint points. Emerson and I decided that we were both on our own. We had different goals, and neither should give them up for the other. We start and I just hang out in the middle of the pack, learning the corners. I miscalculated the first hot spot sprint. They said it would be with 30 to go. For some reason, when I saw 31 to go, I figured I would have all next lap to move forward and then here the bell. I'm an idiot and as we crossed the line and saw 30 to go, the bell obviously rang. I was mid pack and feeling extremely stupid for getting this wrong. I take off in a frenzy towards the front, but the Green Jersey already made his attack and was off the front. By the time we were at the top of the hill, The Green Jersey was in the distance, there were 2 riders giving chase, and I had moved myself to the front of the peloton. At the bottom of the hill, I was in front of the pelaton chasing down the three riders who were already on there way up to the line. I do what I do best and take the corner at a million miles an hour and sprint to second place from WAY far back, and cross the line less than 5 meters behind the green jersey. I was SUPER pissed, realizing I just gave up 2 sprint points to the green jersey. I knew there was no other option but to win the final two sprints, which would not be easy at all. Well, I recover for a bit, but then use the corner at the bottom of the hill to pick up 5 wheels every lap until I am comfortably in the top 15 wheels. Well, sadly, once in the top wheels, I had to deal with sitting in and taking the slow line when as I was boxed in by people taking the fast line. All at once, with 15 to go, I get boxed in at the bottom of the hill, bleed a lot of spots due to a near crash in front of me, and the break goes. Green Jersey is NOT in it, I NEED to be. It takes me a lap to get to the front of a completely strung out peloton, but the gap is out to 30 seconds by the time I do. Its now or never, I need to get into this break. I bury my head with 14 to go and take off after it. As I come around the final few riders in the peloton, I hear Brad yell out to them "YOU NEED TO GO WITH HIM HES GOING FOR IT," and a little bit of hope rises that I may get some help. I think they tried to go with me, but couldn't hang through the bottom corner and I find myself alone. 3 laps later, I had closed the gap down to 8 seconds. But that is as close as I could get. 2 more laps go by and I've made no progress but am absolute dying. I have nothing left to give. I take a look back and see Brad behind me. In a last ditch effort, I decide to let Brad catch me and hope we can close it out. Instead of pedalling the downhill, I get in a tuck and coast, knowing Brad will close up to me. I gained some rest from the downhill, so I knew I would be pulling first and thus start the rotation. I pulled up to the top of the hill that time, then Brad pulled the downhill, and to the end of front straight. This was our rotation. The gap went back out to 20 seconds when I waited for Brad. We worked together and left absolutely everything we had out there over the next 5 laps and got the gap back down to that 8-10 seconds mark, but then it started to go back out in the last 5 laps. As we crossed the line for the second to last time, I could no longer hold Brads wheel up the hill. We had over 30 seconds on the field at this point, so he rode it home to a solo 5th and I took home a solo 6th. What a race. I ended up 4th in the sprint as the break had 2 green jersey contenders in it and they picked up a LOT of points in those last 2 sprints. Emerson stayed with the Pelaton and kept his 9th position in the GC.

My my my, it was quite the trip. Hopefully you got through all this and are now super motivated to come join us next year, despite the fact you need to go uphill at some point. In summary, I learned a lot, took a lot of risks, and spent approximately 40% of GMSR in the wind.

Bring on Portsmouth and Mayors Cup.

Well, I've been waiting to write one of these for a long time now, so here goes.

Myles Standish. Last year I was a 5 when I did this race. To say I was a bit more prepared this time around would be an understatement. I love this course; when online registration opened I immediately signed up for both the 4a and 4b race. This was months ago. Due to the brutal winter there was fear this race would be cancelled. Instead, it was postponed from April and later rescheduled for May. Phew. They sent an email around allowing us to take back our reg fees. No way.

Fresh off a strong start to the season, a win still escaped me. By my math I had exactly 20 points to get my 3 upgrade, but really wanted to get the win. These two races were my last chances to get said win before I would be ridiculed into upgrading. Did I mention that I wanted to win?

With five other teammates in the first race I knew we had a great chance. The week before at Mt. Blue my teammates set me up and I narrowly missed out on the podium in a 5 person sprint. I owed it to them this time around. With 6 of us the plan was a simple one: cover everything, attack relentlessly, line it up at the end.

My girlfriend is from Plymouth and her parents live 5 miles from Myles Standish State Forest, so we headed down Friday night and spent the night there. We had a great dinner with family and friends, I got my 8 hours (compared to a typical 3.5) and woke up ready. I had an identical pre-race ritual for the Plymouth Cyclocross Festival. Coincidentally, that was the first and only bike race I had ever won. I haven't quite figured out the logistics yet, but it looks like I'll need to spend every pre-race night in Plymouth. I woke up, ate breakfast, and headed out solo to ride my bike to the start. I love doing this.

The race was approximately 21 miles over 4 laps with a fast, downhill left leading into the sprint. We were the first race of the day. They cleared the course and we were off. About halfway through the first lap an attack was put in by a solo rider. I recognized the jersey. He took second the weekend before at Mt. Blue and rode off the front of Quabbin for half of the race. I immediately bridged up to him and we got it going. We held a slight gap through the rest of the lap and I knew that if we could hold it through the start/finish we had a good chance of getting out of sight in the rolling twisties. We made it through the start/finish, and I began to ready myself for 4 more laps of glorious pain. By the time I came to grips with this, my break-mate faded and back to the pack we went. Oh well, at least it happened now and not on the last lap.

Throughout the rest of the race we attacked, we covered, we kept it fast. Last lap comes up and I look around. One of my teammates had crashed out, but there were still 5 of us, we still had numbers on our side. I'm sitting pretty in the middle and see Jose up front laying down a good pace. I look around some more and see my other teammates working their way to the front. This is it, we're doing it. I sit pretty a bit longer, smack dab in the middle of the pack. Jose continues to keep the pace just high enough on the front, and my other teammates are right there, ready to respond to any attack. We take the left onto the back section. Still almost half a lap left. I fight the urge to get too close to the front. I know that if I do it now I'll end up on the front too early. As the last couple miles start to click down I slowly creep forward and get on Kameron's wheel.

As we get to the last rise before the downhill left, I hear the attack coming up the left. As soon as it is in my site I scream to Kameron, "GO, THAT'S THE MOVE," and with no hesitation he pounces on the wheel pulling me right along with him. We go over the rise, 1, 2 and 3. We rip the downhill left and as the course starts to flatten I can tell the guy on the front is giving this everything he has. I scream to Kameron, "NOW, GO GO GO GO," and yet again, Kameron delivers. Kameron comes up on the right side of the leading man, but I can tell he is starting to fade from the effort he just put in. I move off of Kameron's wheel and onto the leaders. At this point, I'm not even pedaling, I'm just cruising the slight downhill out of the wind. I wait it out about 2 feet behind the lead rider until I am confident I can sprint to the finish line. I wind it up in his tow, accelerating to his wheel and then I am off. I see the line coming up, take a quick look back, then post up.

These will be the shortest race reports I've ever written.

A few weeks ago I won 2 races out at Intelligentsia. Both of the races were won using identical strategies. End game was a little different between to the two, so I'll split up the story when I get to that part.

First 90% of both races I played a game called "let me see if I can average below 200 watts." I was able to do 201 in race 1 and 199 in race 2.
From 90-95% of the race, I played a game called "get to the front and stay there without seeing the wind."

Dennis Jurs Memorial Road Race
Field was all together but spread across the road. I was in the middle of the road one wheel back. A solo rider when up the right with a couple hundred meters to the final turn and got a little bit of a gap. A solo rider from the field responded quickly and I got on his wheel. He had to close a small gap going to the attacking rider. We went into that last corner 1-2-3 (I was 3). Knowing that number 1 burned a match in his attack, and knowing that number 2 burned a match closing the gap, and knowing that I did absolutely nothing the first 90% of the race, I took the inside line into the final corner (taking over first position) and held the sprint to the line. Unbelievably, someone had a drone and got video of the finish...but had to put stupid music to it.

Holiday Inn Express Niles Cycling Classic
With 2 laps to go, Heiss got on the front and chased down 1 solo rider. He caught him, and we saw 1 to go. Expecting the surge as we got the bell, I removed myself from Mike Morse's wheel in third position, kept a watch over my shoulder, and once I saw the attack I made sure to be on it. I spent maybe 2 seconds in the wind here. Stayed out of the wind in the top 5 wheels the rest of the lap. On the inside line on the final turn, someone actually yelled "inside" to me, to which I replied "not this lap." Then I had an awesome sprint against Cesar and I won by an inch.

Stage 1 - ITT

So the TT was a bust for me. I had no real goal. I don't go uphill well enough for this to matter, but I wanted to see what I could do, and compare to last year. After finishing the race, the only thing that makes sense is that my power meter was reading approximately 20 watts high. What this meant was that that I hit my goal numbers, but was actually doing much less. End of the day, according to Strava and golden cheetah, I was 9 seconds slower than last year, but 20 watts higher. Sadly, I forgot my HRM at home, and had to do the TT without it. Moral of the story, gadgets can be your best friend or worst enemy. Luckily, this made zero difference in the rest of the weekend. Emerson had the 5th fastest time and was only 31 seconds back.

Stage 2 - Circuit Race

The plan was simple. Goal #1, make sure Emerson doesn't lose any time. Goal #2, Gerry goes for sprint. The plan at the end, if all together, is that I would free lance the sprint with Emerson on my wheel if he so chose. He had full liberty to sprint around me for GC bonus, or fall back once we hit the 3k safe zone. Adam was in a lot of back pain from the TT, so he was going to help either of us in anyway he could. I got in line for the start, and realized I forgot my food in the car. Had plenty of time to go get it, but this put me at the way back of staging. Not a big deal, its a 55 mile road race, plenty of time to move up. A break of 4 went almost instantly. It took me a bit to work through the pack but I got up there and took a strong pull until we clawed back 2 that had fallen out of the break. Emerson told me to back it down a notch so I did, but no one else really took on the chase. Halfway through the first of three laps, they move the SRAM car up behind the break. Crap. I go to the front, take stock of the situation, find out who up there has teammates up the road, and get to work. Not too much organization and I find myself on the front more than I'd like. Then Emerson shows himself, which isn't the best, but it was necessary. Then another GC Rider (a few seconds ahead of Emerson), Josh Saxe, also partakes. The 3 of us chase it back. I do my best to keep Emerson's pulls as short as possible and it takes its toll on me. It takes just about the rest of the lap to get them back. When they were within a few seconds I had to go recover, I used up too much gas. I move to the back with a couple km left to the sprint. Adam found me and was just ITCHING to pull me to the front for the sprint, but I couldn't do it. If I tried to sprint I likely would not make it over the KOM. Adam checked with me a few times, and I had to keep on telling him no. It was one of the hardest decisions I've had to make on a bike. We roll through the sprint together, and I BARELY cling on through the KOM. The whole first half of the second lap was a major struggle for me to be honest. Sadly, about halfway through the second lap, another break goes. Dammit. I find Emerson and we decide its someone else's turn...partly because I just wouldn't be able to do it, and partly because it WAS someone else's turn. B2C2 killed it and managed to put a guy in each of the breaks. They were out. We didn't really know anyone else, and the rest of the GC guys were mostly unattached or with weaker teammates. I was still just barely hanging on to the pointy end of the race, not really recovered yet. As we go through the sprint for the second time, I again could not participate in fear of getting dropped on the KOM. As we roll through the sprint, I tell Emerson that I need to make it over the KOM and the first rolling half of the lap. After that, I can chase if needed, but we were pretty opportunistic that the KOM competitors would catch the break on the hill. Thankfully, exactly that happened. Somewhere through the first quarter of the lap, I broke out of the mental funk I was in. Yes, I was in rough shape. Yes, I used up a whole bunch of watts all over the first lap. I just told and convinced myself that everyone else was in just as much pain. I remembered my campfire matchbook. Once I did that, all of my pain went away. I was going to win this race. Emerson tried to get a late break going. With about half a lap to go he attacked into a corner and got a good gap fast and held it for a 10-15 minutes. Sadly, no one went with him. I'm going to say it right now, this was the winning move. With Emerson off the front, it brought me to second wheel to interrupt and mark chasers. We caught Emerson with about 7k to go. He filed back in behind me and it started to get REAL dicey with about 5k to go. Too dicey for Emerson, so he went to the front and put out a strong tempo to the 3k mark, accepting that he would be taking GC time after that big breakaway attempt. This kept it nice and safe for me at 4th wheel. He pulled off soon after, and then the fun really started. I just held my ground the rest of the way. A couple riders slipped past here and there, but it was no big deal. At worst I was 10th wheel. We get to 1km to go and we got the whole road. I surf a few wheels, and put myself 4th wheel with about 500m to go. GC competitors were the first 2 wheels, I was not concerned about them. The sprint was into a head wind and uphill. I decided to jump a bit early at 200m to go. My max power isn't great and it isn't much different from my 10 second or even 15 second power. I new it was early, but I knew I was better off if I could surprise the field. It worked. I never saw another wheel. 1st place, and enough sprint points to take the green jersey. Emerson avoided the big crash and finished with the same GC time as everyone else. We accomplished everything.

This one was important to me.