I drove out to the middle of this tiny little island at 5 in the morning... The sun cresting over pristine waters and immaculate beaches, and I get to race my bike. I'm expecting a Well's ave. I will be rudely mistaken.

I arrive to a small army of people busily preparing the final touches on the Island's premier road race. I report to registration and receive my timing chip (!), and an: "Ah! We've been expecting you, Sam..." from the extremely nice lady running the show. Research has been done on the foreigner.

As I am kitting up, the local news van arrives and begins capturing B roll, droves of people start arriving, and I begin to realize I may not be lining up for the Sunday scrimmage I was expecting. I ask the guy parked next to my comically small clown car if I can borrow his pump, and he obliges. We start chatting.

"Oh yeah! Boston? I never been dere," he says in the thickest Jamaican accent I have ever heard. "You race up dere a lot huh? Dats good. WE RACE DOWN HERE A LOT TOO. Over dere is MITCH, he is a former Olympian. And him there (gesturing to a different massive individual), he was in the olympics as well! That there is Jerome, he's from France... that's pretty much all you need to know about him."

Fine. Whatever. I am a Cat 1 from big bad New England. I race in National level events. I'm fine.

I warm up, sort of. I report to staging and get the rundown. There will be 3 follow cars, one media car, and one SWEET Vespa for water hand ups. The gun (!!) sounds and we are off. Me and every single elite cyclist the Island of Grand Cayman has to offer.

Someone attacks immediately, and French Jerome drags him back. I figure the only way to get a good grasp on who is fast is to kick the hornet's nest. So, naturally, I attack. Mile 2 in a 60 mile road race, of which I have seen 0% of the roads. That's the kind of heads up racing that you have come to know and expect from me.

I get some distance, but as I am draped in our full Nascar outfit, I am quickly covered by the heavy hitters. I think there is a group of 15.

I attack again (#yolo). 6 come across, and there is a massive split. I stay on the gas for about 2 minutes and then urge my compatriots to start rotating. I've abandoned my initial plan of sitting in and sorting out who is good in favor of a more realistic plan of red-lining myself within the first 10 minutes of this race. Bingo.

Anyway. We're now a group of 7, and I am feeling pretty good about myself for having attacked the crap out of this race, forcing a selection, and then driving that selection away from the rest of the race. That said, and referring to my hubris earlier, I was not expecting to be in anywhere close to the amount of pain I was in this early in the day. We settle in. Mostly. One of our breakmates is refusing to pull. Like at all. It's early goings, so I decide that if this pattern of selfish behavior continues, I'm going to take it upon myself to take him off the back and leave him.

A time check from the Moto (chalkboard and everything!!!) tells us 2+ min after the first 2 laps (40miles) Job done. I come off the gas and start taking easy pulls. People get antsy and start looking around. Attacking wildly for 4 seconds and sitting up. Swerving curb to curb as if this the last two miles of Paris-Roubaix. I don't like this. It's approximately 250 degrees outside, and despite the VERY PRO neutral water bottle hand ups from the follow pickup truck (!!!!), I am having a hard time staying conscious. I get on the front and tap out tempo to calm everyone down, and to save myself a few big matches.

At this point, French Jerome has flatted out, and our leach breakmate has still not come through despite one or two attempts at taking him out the back. We discus this, at length, within the group. I am no longer willing to tow this guy (whom I know nothing about ability-wise) 60 miles to a sprint finish. I decide that if they want to, they can tow me as well. I start sitting on with about 6 miles to go. Plenty of time to recover.

It's slow going for the last few miles, everyone knows whats coming, but not from who or where. As I pass what I think is a familiar landmark, I realize we are about 2 miles out. I say to myself: "Self. This might be a chance for you to attack this breakaway and ride in solo-a-la-Cole." I wait till there is another lull in the rotation, and then strike with 80% of my might.

From BEHIND ME, IN THE F*&$&ing follow truck I hear: "UP! UP! UP! HE'S ATTACKING YOU ON THE RIGHT." Not cool local dudes. I look back in amused bewilderment. I call off the attack. I guess I'm gonna just have to do it the only way I know how.

The sprint is fairly straight forward. One of the guys slowly starts ramping it up, knowing full well that he is going to get obliterated and Mitch (the former olympian), Jumps from behind me. It took me an agonizingly long time to wind it up, but when I got going it was all she wrote.

As I looped back around and headed towards the start/finish, I was greeted with cheers and congratulations on a day well raced from total strangers. As I gave my interview for tonights local TV news (!!!!!!!!!!!), I was pretty stoked about what a great day it had been. A little mini one-day classic that was, for reasons that might be a mystery forever, taken down by a fat sprinter.

It was a treat to get to race in a peloton in which I knew nothing about anyone. I had to read the race differently, and accurately in order to survive. Ultimately, I had to race a little selfishly in order to get the job done. Something I am pretty proud to say doesn't get to or have to happen often these days.

Can't wait till Somerville.