The Gateway Cup is a series of four races in St. Louis MO. It has been on our calendar ever since a few fresh faced Cat 1's, hungry to prove that they belonged, flew down 3 years ago. This year was a skeleton crew comprised of Johnny, AJ, and myself. After a fairly decent 12th place on night one, I knew that if I took the same approach (warm up for an hour with my friends, then race for 2 laps), I could notch a good result.

I’d written a whole paragraph about tail gunning, and how great it is, but I think for the sake of instant gratification, we’re going to skip to the end of the race. So: John hung out with AJ and I for 5 laps in the beginning, and then went to go actually race his bike. We had snacks at the back till 6 to go. Seriously.

Around this time, I told AJ that the next time it bunches, we should go to the front. While you run the risk getting swarmed when you move up that early, you only have to apply enough watts once or twice to stay ahead of it. Plus, I hadn't broken a sweat yet. More importantly, you don't want to start moving up too late, and find yourself having to dig deep against a UHC driven field. I took corner 1 quickly, and bingo, the field was curb to curb. I floated from dead last wheel to 10th with almost no effort. OK. Great. Easy part over. I know that I can get to the front of these races, it's staying there that's tricky.

4 to go, and I'm following Astellas up the right side. I'm elbowing people off my left while cross-wheeling Aldo Ilsec to protect my right. I'm full Myerson. I'm full Warner (maybe .7 Warners). It's working. I'm not going anywhere. This is my wheel. Arapahoe and Ego are amassed on the front. They are keeping it fast, but not UHC fast. It’s right about then that I realize that they are nowhere to be found. I stay with Astellas, but am acutely aware of their absence.

2 to go, and here come UHC almost on cue. They've let the smaller teams tear themselves apart early, and they are now 6 strong on the front. It is the usual tumble dryer behind them as everyone and their mother fights for Ty Magner's wheel. I stick with the boys in red.

UPDATE: Someone uploaded a video of the finish, you can KIND of follow along from here (for a bit) http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2_iXeCf-vE&t=1m4s"

1 to go. Total mayhem. Full gas. UHC thunders up the left side, Astellas on the right. I surf wheels straight into the middle of both trains. AJ appears briefly from the ashes behind me, but the move is storming up the left side (@1:33). I chose to leave the safety of a friendly wheel, and continue behind the trains. The speed is flat out, 36mph. It only gets faster. This is usually right around the time I am going totally crosseyed... Where I am breathing out of my eyes and nothing makes sense. Where I question why I even bothered coming. Where I pedal till my legs seize and maintain a top 10... But this time, something is different. I know this feeling. I've felt this before at bell lap. I'm 10th wheel, breathing out of my nose, and nothing hurts. I'm thinking clearly... tactically. We bomb into corner two 2 wide. What is happening?

It's 4 UHC dudes, Holloway, Aldo, Brian Gomez, then me. What is happening? Brendan from Astellas tries to move in on my right and pinch me off the wheel(@2:00). My elbow is out as we tear through corner 3. Everyone’s brakes squeal but mine. UHC is full sprint out of the corner. Holloway and Aldo are following, and I've popped around Gomez to find their wheel. Into the final corner we go, and I have a similar thought I had just a few weeks ago at little ol' Witches Cup: "If we make it through this corner on the rubber, I'm gonna get a massive result here!"

Aldo breaks right, and so does Holloway. I go left (yolo) and hit the throttle. I move an Arapahoe rider (who had made a last ditch effort to bomb the corner) to the barriers and am full gas to the line. My eyes are on Aldo and Holloway who are neck and neck... and going... backwards... towards me. I am out-kicking them. What is happening?

My focus snaps back to the line as I come over the top of them, with just enough time to realize that I was gaining on Ty Magner too. I overtake him just after the line. My heart sinks. Then explodes. WHAT THE FUCK IS HAPPENING?!?!?!

On the cool down lap I am trying to catch my breath. I am trying to make sense of it. AJ catches up and I flash him two fingers. He acts surprised, but I don't think he really believed me. I'm GENUINELY not sure I believe me either.

As we roll up the finishing stretch, Johnny is waiting with open arms and the biggest smile I've ever seen. We are jumping up and down celebrating, not just as if I'd just won the race, (which, just to remind you, I hadn’t) but as if I'd won the fucking Super Bowl. I might as well have. We continue carrying on as Frankie Andreu turns into Richard Fries and starts talking me up to a crowd who were all collectively thinking the same thing the peloton must have been: "Who?"

There were four races this weekend, three of which came down to a sprint. Yet, there were only four different people on the podium all weekend. A current national champion, a literal giant with a full squad of pros behind him, Ty Magner of U-H-fucking-C, and me, Sam Rosenholtz, NE big fish, PRT guppy with a skeleton crew.

"If I get a clear shot at the sprint... I can win one of these you guys!” I’ve been saying this since I started racing the National Calendar races. It took almost 4 years, but it’s a truly amazing feeling to confirm what I knew in my heart and in my legs was possible: That we can go toe to toe with the best in the country, and BEAT them. Period*

*As long as I don't have to pedal hard for 90% of the race, AND have the course be 4 runways joined together by the widest corners there can be.

I am looking forward to Mayor’s Cup like I never have before. 2011: Finish 2012: See the front of the race. 2013: Try for a prime? 2014: Actually try for a prime. 2015: Top 10. 2016: Fucking. Win. 