The Gateway Cup is a series of four races in St. Louis MO. It has been on our calendar ever since a few fresh faced Cat 1's, hungry to prove that they belonged, flew down 3 years ago. This year was a skeleton crew comprised of Johnny, AJ, and myself. After a fairly decent 12th place on night one, I knew that if I took the same approach (warm up for an hour with my friends, then race for 2 laps), I could notch a good result.

I’d written a whole paragraph about tail gunning, and how great it is, but I think for the sake of instant gratification, we’re going to skip to the end of the race. So: John hung out with AJ and I for 5 laps in the beginning, and then went to go actually race his bike. We had snacks at the back till 6 to go. Seriously.

So. Around this time, I told AJ that the next time it bunches, we should go to the front. While you run the risk getting swarmed when you move up that early, you only have to apply enough watts once or twice to stay ahead of it. Plus, I hadn't broken a sweat yet. More importantly, you don't want to start moving up too late, and find yourself having to dig deep against a UHC driven field. I took corner 1 quickly, and bingo, the field was curb to curb. I floated from dead last wheel to 10th with almost no effort. OK. Great. Easy part over. I know that I can get to the front of these races, it's staying there that's tricky.

4 to go, and I'm following Astellas up the right side. I'm elbowing people off my left while cross-wheeling Aldo Ilsec to protect my right. I'm full Myerson. I'm full Warner (maybe .7 Warners). It's working. I'm not going anywhere. This is my wheel. Arapahoe and Ego are amassed on the front. They are keeping it fast, but not UHC fast. It’s right about then that I realize that they are nowhere to be found. I stay with Astellas, but am acutely aware of their absence.

2 to go, and here come UHC almost on cue. They've let the smaller teams tear themselves apart early, and they are now 6 strong on the front. It is the usual tumble dryer behind them as everyone and their mother fights for Ty Magner's wheel. I stick with the boys in red.

UPDATE: Someone uploaded a video of the finish, you can KIND of follow along from here (for a bit) http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2_iXeCf-vE&t=1m4s"

1 to go. Total mayhem. Full gas. UHC thunders up the left side, Astellas on the right. I surf wheels straight into the middle of both trains. AJ appears briefly from the ashes behind me, but the move is storming up the left side (@1:33). I chose to leave the safety of a friendly wheel, and continue behind the trains. The speed is flat out, 36mph. It only gets faster. This is usually right around the time I am going totally crosseyed... Where I am breathing out of my eyes and nothing makes sense. Where I question why I even bothered coming. Where I pedal till my legs seize and maintain a top 10... But this time, something is different. I know this feeling. I've felt this before at bell lap. I'm 10th wheel, breathing out of my nose, and nothing hurts. I'm thinking clearly... tactically. We bomb into corner two 2 wide. WHAT THE FUCK IS HAPPENING?!?!?!

So. It's 4 UHC dudes, Holloway, Aldo, Brian Gomez, then me. What is happening? Brendan from Astellas tries to move in on my right and pinch me off the wheel(@2:00). My elbow is out as we tear through corner 3. Everyone’s brakes squeal but mine. UHC is full sprint out of the corner. Holloway and Aldo are following, and I've popped around Gomez to find their wheel. Into the final corner we go, and I have a similar thought I had just a few weeks ago at little ol' Witches Cup: "If we make it through this corner on the rubber, I'm gonna get a massive result here!"

Aldo breaks right, and so does Holloway. I go left (yolo) and hit the throttle. I move an Arapahoe rider (who had made a last ditch effort to bomb the corner) to the barriers and am full gas to the line. My eyes are on Aldo and Holloway who are neck and neck... and going... backwards... towards me. I am out-kicking them. What is happening?

My focus snaps back to the line as I come over the top of them, with just enough time to realize that I was gaining on Ty Magner too. I overtake him just after the line. My heart sinks. Then explodes. WHAT THE FUCK IS HAPPENING?!?!?!

On the cool down lap I am trying to catch my breath. I am trying to make sense of it. AJ catches up and I flash him two fingers. He acts surprised, but I don't think he really believed me. I'm GENUINELY not sure I believe me either.

As we roll up the finishing stretch, Johnny is waiting with open arms and the biggest smile I've ever seen. We are jumping up and down celebrating, not just as if I'd just won the race, (which, just to remind you, I hadn’t) but as if I'd won the fucking Super Bowl. I might as well have. We continue carrying on as Frankie Andreu turns into Richard Fries and starts talking me up to a crowd who were all collectively thinking the same thing the peloton must have been: "Who?"

There were four races this weekend, three of which came down to a sprint. Yet, there were only four different people on the podium all weekend. A current national champion, a literal giant with a full squad of pros behind him, Ty Magner of U-H-FUCKING-C, and me, Sam Rosenholtz, NE big fish, PRT guppy with a skeleton crew.

"If I get a clear shot at the sprint... I can win one of these you guys!” I’ve been saying this since I started racing the National Calendar races. It took almost 4 years, but it’s a truly amazing feeling to confirm what I knew in my heart and in my legs was possible: That we can go toe to toe with the best in the country, and BEAT them. Period.

As long as I don't have to pedal hard for 90% of the race, AND have the course be 4 runways joined together by the widest corners there can be.

I am looking forward to Mayor’s Cup like I never have before. 2011: Finish 2012: See the front of the race. 2013: Try for a prime? 2014: Actually try for a prime. 2015: Top 10. 2016: Fucking. Win. We have a lot of history at the Witches Cup. I remember, very vividly, the feeling of being in way over my head in my second ever P/1/2/3. Not in terms of racing fitness (though, yes, very much in terms of racing), but in terms of star power. As the call-ups rang out: “Jessie Anthony, Luke Keogh, Tim Johnson, Mark McCormack…” The feeling deepened. All names I would become acutely familiar with in the coming years, but only had a cursory understanding about at the time. Our team was young, and for the most part, had no idea what we were doing. I finished 28th and absolutely in the box. Humbled.

Since then, our little team has grown exponentially, and we’ve been able to win races of similar stature. This one, however, has always alluded us. It’s a race that, by all accounts, we should have won a few times in years past. We just haven’t been able to get it quite right. Worse than that, we got it very wrong in its last iteration two years ago. I did anyway.

So when it was announced that the Witches Cup would be returning to the schedule in 2016, and it was to be the stage upon which we would mount the defense of our third MA State Championship, I was simultaneously thrilled and terrified. It’s a big feat to defend back to back championships… three? Thats tough.

While we’re on the topic of backstory: to say that this season was rollercoaster-esq would be a bit on the nose. From achieving form I’d never felt before in Spain, to losing nearly all of it in to illness nearing almost two months in length, to quitting almost daily in a rebuild block coach affectionately named “salvage,” things were not shaping up the way I had planned. Max’s “this sport favors disappointment over reward” rang true for a lot of us this year. Something clicked just before the Clam Fest, though, and I started to feel more and more like myself. Taking the win there unlocked my confidence. As ridiculous and arrogant and bonkers as this sounds, I haven’t lost a local race since. Yarmouth, Beverly, Auburn-Lewiston, Concord. Four in a row. And as weird as THIS sounds… it didn’t necessarily help me going into this race. 5 in a row… the odds are stacked. Especially going into a race I have historically binned in spectacular fashion.

Seeking shelter in our tent, we were able to watch our 3’s dominate their race in an actual hurricane. Seeing Adam blow the race apart heroically made my cold black heart grow three sizes. Seeing Dan attack into the bell, reminiscent of THE Cole Archambault at Berger a few weeks earlier, was tactically stunning. Seeing Gerry Stomp all over that sprint was exhilarating. It was what I needed. It was our turn.

Our plan for the day was simple: Weld it together all day, and set up Johnny, Cole and I to storm the last lap, and let everyone know what it feels like to have a strong team in full flight deliver a sprinter to the line. Fucking. Win.

The early laps were cautious nervous as we all tried to figure out just how far we could lean our bikes on the freshly resurfaced ice rink on which we were now racing. People still managed to crash. They always do. The attacks started early. The first notable one coming from Kai Wiggins, which was covered, solo, by a freshly-raced cat 3 named Dan. The message was a shot across the bow: We have the numbers. You aren’t going anywhere. Accept your fate.

This lasted an hour. An attack goes; Shinall is in it sabotaging. 3 guys go up the road, Heiss to the rescue. 6 dudes get a gap, thats a job for juggernaut AJ, crushing your dreams since 2010. At times I would get shuffled too far back for comfort in the midst of freshly minted 3’s and their timidness in the wet. I’d find Smith and say: “We’re going to the front next lap” and off we go, delivering me back into the mix of hitters 3 laps fresher than anyone else.

As the laps ticked by I found myself split between being more anxious than I have ever been to get to the closing laps, and wanting to savor the slowly forming crowd finding their way to the course now that the rain had ceased. The Witches Cup crowd of old was arriving, and just in time for the show. 10 to go.

At 4-5 to go, a dangerous move rolled off the front. I say that in the traditional sense, in that it had everyone that was required to win a bike race; every team represented, including us. Kai, Ansel, Errace (who had a team the size of ours) and Cole. AJ and Heiss were on the front, Johnny and I were waiting in the wings, and Cole was skipping pulls as instructed. We had complete control of the race. I told AJ and Mike to keep the pressure on, but didn’t explain why, and without hesitation, the twin engines pulled the break back. Why pull that move back? Cole has an excellent chance of winning, especially after not pulling for 3 laps. Well: The gap is not that big. 5 seconds. A very bridge-able distance for many of the strong dudes who’ve missed the move. If we sit up we are facing a MASSIVE swarm which would simultaneously swallow me and John AND, potentially, our guy in the break.

We catch the move into the bell lap. FUCK.

The initial plan was for John to lead Cole and I down the back stretch, Cole to open up the sprint, and then release me down the finishing stretch like some sort of crazed, wild eyed beast, prey in its sights. We are shuffled now, though, so we need a new plan, and we need it fast.

Cole sees that we’re attached, switches his role to Johns, and guns it. He leads us at speed into corner 3 and sits up before John was initially supposed to, putting Myerson and Ansel in the wind briefly before the corner. RUTHLESS.

Once we are upright through the turn, Johnny hits out to get us over the top of the current leaders, and maintain the plan of going 1-2 through the corner. Myerson senses the move and tries to shut the door and put John in the curb. Johnny is having none of it. HE. GOES. FASTER. into a disappearing gap and punches through taking me with him. It was some of the most inspired riding I’ve ever seen. I have been replaying it in my head all day.

Through the last corner. Upright. Big sigh of relief. Ansel somehow manages to take the outside line and not burst into flames into the outside curb, and pull alongside Johnny on the outside. I panic for a sliver of a second and then realize his error. He’s in the wind, Johnny is winding up, and I am still sitting down behind him. I wait 4 pedal strokes and stand and deliver for just as long as I have to.

I yell out loud like an idiot. Johnny yells so loud that I thought he might have actually won and I was hallucinating the whole thing. The cool down lap was surreal. The podium celebration over too quickly. I want to live in that moment a bit longer.

This was our third State Championship, but (and I think Cole will agree) really our first. The other two jerseys, while rightfully ours, were consolation prizes for 5th and 2nd place. To win it going away, to win it how we did, and to win it at the Witches Cup are rare things respectively. To do it all at once is nothing less than magical. This one was special, and the privilege to bring it home is one that I’ll never ever forget.


Thanks for this one you guys.

SamI drove out to the middle of this tiny little island at 5 in the morning... The sun cresting over pristine waters and immaculate beaches, and I get to race my bike. I'm expecting a Well's ave. I will be rudely mistaken.

I arrive to a small army of people busily preparing the final touches on the Island's premier road race. I report to registration and receive my timing chip (!), and an: "Ah! We've been expecting you, Sam..." from the extremely nice lady running the show. Research has been done on the foreigner.

As I am kitting up, the local news van arrives and begins capturing B roll, droves of people start arriving, and I begin to realize I may not be lining up for the Sunday scrimmage I was expecting. I ask the guy parked next to my comically small clown car if I can borrow his pump, and he obliges. We start chatting.

"Oh yeah! Boston? I never been dere," he says in the thickest Jamaican accent I have ever heard. "You race up dere a lot huh? Dats good. WE RACE DOWN HERE A LOT TOO. Over dere is MITCH, he is a former Olympian. And him there (gesturing to a different massive individual), he was in the olympics as well! That there is Jerome, he's from France... that's pretty much all you need to know about him."

Fine. Whatever. I am a Cat 1 from big bad New England. I race in National level events. I'm fine.

I warm up, sort of. I report to staging and get the rundown. There will be 3 follow cars, one media car, and one SWEET Vespa for water hand ups. The gun (!!) sounds and we are off. Me and every single elite cyclist the Island of Grand Cayman has to offer.

Someone attacks immediately, and French Jerome drags him back. I figure the only way to get a good grasp on who is fast is to kick the hornet's nest. So, naturally, I attack. Mile 2 in a 60 mile road race, of which I have seen 0% of the roads. That's the kind of heads up racing that you have come to know and expect from me.

I get some distance, but as I am draped in our full Nascar outfit, I am quickly covered by the heavy hitters. I think there is a group of 15.

I attack again (#yolo). 6 come across, and there is a massive split. I stay on the gas for about 2 minutes and then urge my compatriots to start rotating. I've abandoned my initial plan of sitting in and sorting out who is good in favor of a more realistic plan of red-lining myself within the first 10 minutes of this race. Bingo.

Anyway. We're now a group of 7, and I am feeling pretty good about myself for having attacked the crap out of this race, forcing a selection, and then driving that selection away from the rest of the race. That said, and referring to my hubris earlier, I was not expecting to be in anywhere close to the amount of pain I was in this early in the day. We settle in. Mostly. One of our breakmates is refusing to pull. Like at all. It's early goings, so I decide that if this pattern of selfish behavior continues, I'm going to take it upon myself to take him off the back and leave him.

A time check from the Moto (chalkboard and everything!!!) tells us 2+ min after the first 2 laps (40miles) Job done. I come off the gas and start taking easy pulls. People get antsy and start looking around. Attacking wildly for 4 seconds and sitting up. Swerving curb to curb as if this the last two miles of Paris-Roubaix. I don't like this. It's approximately 250 degrees outside, and despite the VERY PRO neutral water bottle hand ups from the follow pickup truck (!!!!), I am having a hard time staying conscious. I get on the front and tap out tempo to calm everyone down, and to save myself a few big matches.

At this point, French Jerome has flatted out, and our leach breakmate has still not come through despite one or two attempts at taking him out the back. We discus this, at length, within the group. I am no longer willing to tow this guy (whom I know nothing about ability-wise) 60 miles to a sprint finish. I decide that if they want to, they can tow me as well. I start sitting on with about 6 miles to go. Plenty of time to recover.

It's slow going for the last few miles, everyone knows whats coming, but not from who or where. As I pass what I think is a familiar landmark, I realize we are about 2 miles out. I say to myself: "Self. This might be a chance for you to attack this breakaway and ride in solo-a-la-Cole." I wait till there is another lull in the rotation, and then strike with 80% of my might.

From BEHIND ME, IN THE F*&$&ing follow truck I hear: "UP! UP! UP! HE'S ATTACKING YOU ON THE RIGHT." Not cool local dudes. I look back in amused bewilderment. I call off the attack. I guess I'm gonna just have to do it the only way I know how.

The sprint is fairly straight forward. One of the guys slowly starts ramping it up, knowing full well that he is going to get obliterated and Mitch (the former olympian), Jumps from behind me. It took me an agonizingly long time to wind it up, but when I got going it was all she wrote.

As I looped back around and headed towards the start/finish, I was greeted with cheers and congratulations on a day well raced from total strangers. As I gave my interview for tonights local TV news (!!!!!!!!!!!), I was pretty stoked about what a great day it had been. A little mini one-day classic that was, for reasons that might be a mystery forever, taken down by a fat sprinter.

It was a treat to get to race in a peloton in which I knew nothing about anyone. I had to read the race differently, and accurately in order to survive. Ultimately, I had to race a little selfishly in order to get the job done. Something I am pretty proud to say doesn't get to or have to happen often these days.

FUCK I can't wait till Somerville.

I suppose I'll write a report, if only to keep up appearance and make it a habit.

After a not-so-easy day with Krulewatts, Mini Krulewatts, and Merola the day before, I had decided that I would again enter a race at Bethel with total reckless abandon. That is to say I would go there to race, as hard as I could, and ruin other people's attempts at victory. So, along that line of thinking, I decided to tack on a solid 1.5hr tempo ride before hand. Smart Sam.

Here are notable things that happened in an easy-to-digest numbered format:

1.) I went for the first prime. I bridged to a group of about 8 bros that had been, until then, hovering with about 10 seconds on the field. I attacked them violently, looking at each of them in the eye as I exploded past them on the way to collect my winnings. I crested the hill, however, to find that both of the 2-place-prime spots were already up the road. Idiot.

2.) CCNS had 4 dudes, all of which are very strong. Six Cycle had 32 dudes, of which 4 were strong. Other than that, there were a few other noticeably fast guys in the field who I tried to keep my eye on.

3.) At a certain point, there was a break of 13 or so guys. It was dangerous, as it contained most everyone from point #2 including BOTH Dan Hoyle and Ryan Serbal of CCNS. I tried, 3. fucking. times. To bridge to it. Eventually I gave up and started to enlist the help of 2 other teams that had missed the split. To my absolute shock, the breakaway stopped working together and it all came back with about 17 to go. Grouppo. Compacto.

4.) At 10 to go, there was another split. One that contained NONE if the important teams, and ONLY the smattering of super strong dudes I had mentioned before. I was near-ish to the front of the race, and pushed the pace hard down the back stretch to try and hammer it back together so that I would have some slight glimmer of hope for a bunch sprint. When I looked behind me, I saw two other guys and a MASSIVE gap. The field had all but given up.

"Well. Fuck it." I let the two other guys take their pull as Ryan Serbal bridged to our little chasing group. Once he did, he and I punched it, dropped the two stragglers, and made it across the gap... totally. gassed.

5.) We made contact with 6 to go. The next five laps are a total blur of lactic acid and tears.

6.) Bell lap. This break of 10 is together with 30 seconds on the field. As we crest the hill and make the turn down the front stretch, I fall back to about 6th wheel. My legs hurt. There are 4 guys I am keeping my eye on. One I am worried about. Ryan.

7.) Down the back stretch, everyone is still taking their pulls on the front, which surprised me a bit. Then, WAY too soon, Champion systems goes, and it's on. I jump comfortably onto his wheel as he is full gas, Ryan is on my wheel. I am grinning from ear to ear already. I start to wind it up just before the final corner, and jump right at the base of the hill. It's over in 10 seconds. Ryan hung on, like a tiny little koala bear I could not shake, but in the end it was a decisive gap. One that is magnified by the distance he and I put into the rest of the break.

TL;DR
Last year, my win at Bethel was a bit more dramatic. It was race #1. It was a call to arms. It was a bunch sprint, and I won by a mile. This one feels different. Green Line Velo has entered 4 races (there abouts) and have WON. FUCKING. 2 OF THEM. Josh's herculean effort the week before is no small feat either. This feels different, but signifies the same thing. Something better. All of the doubts I had about being behind in my training. All of the worrying I did as I toiled away in the cold (albeit slightly less then the rest of you). All of that, gone. Done. My legs and my heart and my lungs are ready to lead this team into 2013 the way everyone fears were are capeable. We're coming out swinging. We are coming out screaming, covered in baby oil and on fire.

We're back.

(!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!)